Congratulations on your official title here.
My official title is Vice President and Publisher of the Children's Book Department.
Of children's books, I think.
And you arrived here after 10 years at the Horn Book.
Yeah, 11 years.
11 years at the Horn Book.
So you certainly served a tenure in keeping with the tradition over there.
I guess you were the sixth editor in the 70-year history.
Yeah, I was the sixth editor, and...
It's interesting, many of the tenures run around in that ten-year vein.
That's not unusual.
That's more than the Constitution allows Presidents to serve.
I know.
That's true.
It's like I got that third term, right?
I'm a great bibliophile, and I have my own book out right now, which is a
obtained to books.
It's called A Gentle Madness.
I don't know if you know anything about it.
It's about bibliophilia, bibliomania.
It's doing pretty good.
It's third printing, and we have with Holt.
And I have two sections in the book about women who put together extraordinary collections of children's books.
Betsy Shirley, Betsy Beinecke Shirley, whose collection is going to
to Yale.
Oh, okay.
Yale.
And when I interviewed her, walking in her home in New Jersey, she has the original painting from the Wyatt, the Treasure Island.
Treasure Island, oh.
And there's that blank spot.
I said to my wife, I said, look, thousands of times have you seen this.
There's the painting.
Yeah, yeah.
And she collects original art, and her collection is extraordinary.
It's the finest by far.
Beinecke is her middle name.
Okay, yeah.
I was going to say, from that book, you may have noticed, but I think one of the greatest, I was able to use it in color, I think one of the greatest illustrations of all times is Blind Pew Groping Down the Road.
I just think that is such an extraordinary, it's sort of the image of great illustrated books from around the turn of the century.
Tell me about, this is quite an undertaking, this book that you did here.
Yeah, it, it, um,
I was approached by an editor who said, what reference book don't you have?
At Houghton, they were thinking of doing a children's reference book, and she sort of said, what reference book doesn't exist?
And I basically outlined the idea of this book, that we needed something that focused on the 20th century, particularly the latter part, because so much of the reference work for children's books published
focus on the history and the classics and things like that.
We really needed something of the latter part of the 20th century, something in which creators themselves might talk, as well as there be essays on them, and that would try to give us an overview of basically the field, and the field as we see it now, you know, at the end of the 20th century, rather than how it was perceived sort of midway.
And she said, it sounds wonderful, why don't you do it?
That's how it happened.
Terrific.
How long did you assign the essays?
Right, I had to assign the essays.
I had to come up with the lists.
The manuscript, which came to about 3,000 pages, had to be pulled together in about a year and a half, because you can't have
One written in 1993 and one written in 1996, you know, because then suddenly different bodies of work by an author are being prepared.
So it really had to turn around in a rather short period of time.
So that was the great hurdle, was sort of getting everything together and in.
in a final manuscript that could be published.
And getting these contributors who agreed to be able to do this.
That's right.
And to do it and to, you know, work with them on the essays to get the essays sort of shaped up in some way.
I love reference books.
And I quite agree.
And I have whatever children's books references there are, too.
And, you know, it's terrific.
It's right up there on the shelf.
I write a lot of children's book reviews.
My wife and I do the children's books together, I have to say.
And we do at least two a year, one for summer and for now.
And I try and get about 120 books in.
Oh, yeah.
And whatever I can get.
But I really do select them.
I mean, we really have.
And I noticed that we've noted trends over recent years.
And I noticed in one of the interviews that you did,
It is amazing how functional children's books have become, and particularly the picture ones.
I mean, there really are themes.
Yes.
And they're really addressed to... I'll comment on that.
And I really look for themes that are in vogue for a particular year, or not necessarily vogue, but useful, and how wonderful the illustrations are, and really how beautiful they are.
Yeah.
I think that one of the main things that has changed, particularly when I was working on the picture book,
essays here, and looking at picture books from Beatrix Potter, really, to contemporary days, you can really see how in the 1980s, when technology suddenly changed, and artists no longer had to do, you know, that wonderful full-color separation process that the British always used to call that primitive American art form that they had to do.
When you could literally take any kind of artwork and put it in front of a camera, suddenly there's an explosion of
the kinds of artists who come into the field, the way arts prepare, the range, the variety, the quality of artists, and literally, you know, people are hunting for artists in galleries now as opposed to hunting for somebody who's trained to do four-color separation, which is what you had to do before.
So when you're thinking about ideas and looking for books, do you
Does it matter?
Does an author have to come to you with an artist, or do you try to be a matchmaker?
No, you absolutely try to be a matchmaker.
A lot of what good editors do and a lot of what happens in publishing houses is that you find that story or manuscript that you want to publish first, and then you, of the range of maybe a thousand artists that you may know whose work you may have seen,
you then try to find the perfect artist and author to meld together.
There are some people who are multi-talented and can write and illustrate their own.
Steig and, you know, James Marshall, Chris Van Oldsburg, David McCauley, you know.
I mean, some of the great, Alan Say, some of the great illustrators can really can write.
Sendak, of course, you know, Lobel.
I mean, you know...
that can do both.
But very often facility with words isn't necessarily facility with images.
So that's a lot of what... But I think in the world of editing and publishing, it really is, if not unique, it really is quite a responsibility, an added dimension to the job.
Oh, absolutely.
It's not like getting an adult novel and that's all you have to focus on.
And then working on it and making sure it works.
It takes that extra skill of even reading a picture book text
you know, just in manuscript, you have to be able to envision what could an artist do with it, because it, you know, sometimes just picture book text alone when you read them, without the art, you can't imagine.
It's almost a throwback, isn't it, because the great, I love to collect 19th century fiction, and of course when you had Mark Twain paired up with an artist who would visualize
And you have Fizz with Dickens, I guess.
Oh, exactly.
And Carol and Tenniel.
Exactly.
And, of course, that largely disappeared in the 20th century from the adult level.
You only find people like Barry Moser trying to go back to that.
with mixed results, I think.
Yeah, and John Gardner, as you know, had some of his novels illustrated, did some of that illustrated work in novels.
I love that.
Do you suppose it did disappear because of this, you know, the mass media and television and all these other things?
Yeah, I don't know in...
People often ask me about adult publishing, and I really, I must admit, I have a level of ignorance.
And I just have to admit, I just have a level of ignorance.
But in children's publishing, of course, that's never been given up.
You know, I mean, we have a lot of middle grade novels in the same way, which...
Again, the same thing.
You have a text, and you're trying to find an illustrator for it.
Lois Lowry's Anastasia books, or we have here at the Clifford's books.
A whole variety of Beverly Cleary's novels.
Again, they're illustrated.
So I really think even fictions works best with suggestions of visual images sometimes, because they are quite delightful.
I mean, it's wonderful to be able to see a character.
When you see a manuscript text,
And this is from a writer who really doesn't have a working relationship with an artist.
And so now your job is really to make a match.
Do you visualize, can you see some of the pictures?
And you think which artist would be perfect for that?
I mean, that goes back to what you've already said.
But can you see the pictures?
Well, I think you, the wonderful thing is, of course,
An artist is so much more creative than you are.
I mean, that's what you're hoping for.
But what you can match is mood and nuance and the kind of thing that someone does and the sort of feeling.
Yes, you can visualize some of it, but then literally that manuscript, after it's finished, is given to the artist, and the artist will then start to
work on it, create it, create the scenes, create the settings.
Sometimes you'll send it to an artist to do, we have a manuscript right here, just to do a couple of illustrations as to how it would look.
And then you may say, oh, I like it, or no, maybe this isn't quite what we want.
But a good artist will always do more than you can ever imagine.
That's what's exciting about a picture book.
I really like the collaboration with Chris and
Yeah.
Mark Halpern on Swan Lake.
Right, Swan Lake, yes.
Now, that's an example of an old illustrated book of that ilk, yeah.
And it's taking a classic story, and you might just talk a little bit about classics.
That's almost a perfect example, isn't it, of a timeless story?
That's right, yeah.
And what does make a story timeless or classic?
I always think they're very...
simple things.
When you look at the classics, they really have several simple things in common.
One is often a story or plot line that is so compelling and remains compelling.
Or it could be a character that, again, children can identify with.
I mean, we really define classic as a book that survives more than one generation, a book that's passed down from
yet to another generation to another generation.
But it's usually those simple literary elements, a story that needs to be told, characters that work well, something that no matter what the window dressing of the time, the basic form works.
The basic form still is compelling to a reader.
Do you find that as an editor of children's books that
You're walking kind of a fine line in that the target audience is the child.
But to get to that child, you have to impress the person who, in all likelihood, will be buying the book, which is an adult.
And I find that, you know, the books that we love, we were collecting children's books long before we had children.
Right, yeah.
Because I've been getting review books for 20 years.
You know, wonderful, marvelous, I don't know, how many thousand children's books.
But, you know, we love them.
I mean, and they appeal to us, and then we kind of pass that on.
Do you find that it is two audiences?
Or is it necessary for you to try and reach the parent?
I'm one of these people who really believes that the great books for children appeal both to adults.
You know, they have those literary qualities that, as adults, we say, these are quite wonderful.
But they also appeal to children.
They also speak to children.
That we are not talking...
different kinds of things, that we're really, in the great, this is the great books, this is not the, this is not class B or class C, you know, that an adult reading Polar Express is going to read it on one level, and a child reading Polar Express is going to respond to even other things, and that the real classics, you really find the books that last over time, tend to have that double dimension.
But
you, as you said, it's the one field in which the adults do all the buying, so that there's always, and they do all the reading, and they do all the editing, and they do all the reviewing, and they do the, you know, I mean, it's an entire... So you've got to capture them first, don't you?
So, well, if, I mean, I was raised in the school that in the end, you must think of the child, you know, remember the children.
I mean, that's the, I think great children's publishers remember the children.
That doesn't mean writing down.
No, it doesn't mean writing.
In fact, I believe it's having infinite respect for children.
But the great creators, to me, always remember that the audience for this book is a child.
And there's certainly publishing.
That's publishing for adults.
You know, it will attract adults.
And it looks wonderful for adults.
But those books don't last over time, because in the end, you know,
I mean, I always talk about those books.
I share books with children.
And one of the books that I would consider in this category, and I won't name names, but the child I was sitting with read it and said, now I need to read it and we'll never have to read it again.
And those books published for adults, you know, very often that's the response.
And they don't live.
Curious George, you know, lives.
Does he ever.
Does he ever, because, guess what, he really works with the child audience.
My daughter threw up a picture of Curious George.
And they pass it on, and it did the next generation.
Dr. Seuss lives on because he wrote for children.
He really wrote for the audience.
So you can, I think, I think the problem is if you get confused in publishing and you say, okay, I am going to publish for the adults, you know, that they're
There is a kind of publishing like that that's, you know, certainly goes on.
There's also a kind of publishing that goes on that does not take the child reader very seriously and, you know, believes that they can be given anything.
I just noticed yesterday, and we got in the mail, you know, a package sent to me in my post office.
And I have a little syndicate, a literary features syndicate.
My wife and I write for about 25 newspapers will get this story.
a thing comes in, it's from Shaw's Supermarkets, and I said, what the heck is this?
And they are launching a line of, and they had a couple of, I mean, we're talking, really, stuff that you'd expect in the rack of a supermarket, and I'm just wondering, you know, you talk about things that last, I'm sure they're going to price them about $2.95, $3.95, or whatever.
Yes, yeah.
How did I get into that line?
But I mean, you talk about things that really,
aren't going to last at all.
Aren't going to last, I know.
It's almost a cynical approach, isn't it?
Yes, yeah.
I mean, literally to offer them in supermarkets in the same... I'm not asking you to comment on that.
Yes, obviously I can't, because it's coming from another, as you know.
And I won't, but I'm just commenting here.
Yeah, exactly.
Don't worry about it, but it is a... Yeah, there is that kind of... I guess I'm kind of siguing into, here we are, what, five years from the millennium, and I'm asked, with my book, I've been giving these talks and things,
like I should know, but, you know, CD-ROM and all this other stuff, what's going to come to, what's the book going to come to?
Who knows, number one.
Right.
But number two, I mean, books started as clay tablets, and they were scrolls for hundreds of years, and they were manuscripts, and then they were printed books.
Illuminated manuscripts, and then you come to Gutenberg, and then you come, yeah.
But the concept of the book has always been there.
There will always be a book, but whether or not, I mean, are you fearful that it will
go away from hardcovers?
I think, I'm one of these people who really has, I just have great faith in the book.
You know, I have great faith in creative ideas certainly starting there.
I think it may, you know, it may take many other forms.
I mean, I, you know, I think... I would never predict.
And I would never predict because I'm not a futurist, so that, you know, but I really... My next book, by the way, will have this as a coda, basically, this consideration, which is, I'm asking you
for quotes now that may not necessarily be in this piece.
Be in here, yeah.
In fact, I might come back to you at some point.
Okay, yeah.
But I still, I believe in the power of what can be done in the form of a book.
And, you know, as we always say, you know, you can take it anywhere.
Well, mine is a little heavy.
I can't really take it on them.
But, you know, you can take it with you anywhere.
It's portable.
It's... This one, I know, exactly.
You know, you can carry them anywhere, take them anywhere.
There's something private and individual about them.
You know, I really believe that the book has a tremendous amount of power to it.
And I would hate for those of us to love books to forget what that power can be.
But yes, will books probably go into many different formats like CD-ROMs and, you know, who knows?
Which Houghton is doing the one with everybody else.
Exactly, Houghton is doing with everyone else.
Do you then take that?
and make it available in other ways, absolutely.
But I do believe that for creative people, working in a book form has a certain intimacy and excitement, and you know, otherwise why are all our politicians
campaigning with their book tours.
It's so strange in a society in which we say we're moving away from books.
It would seem to me that the power of the book is quite extraordinary.
I saw a statistic that he was with one of the press releases of his piece.
I think it was a quote from you, in fact, that 40% of publishing is not children's books.
Is that right?
40% of books, give or take?
Possible.
Children's books have become
a huge segment of publishing.
You know, there was a boom in the 1980s in terms of just titles and numbers, and it was quite extraordinary.
Part of that is the whole, you know, whole language in schools.
Part of it was the growth of children's independent bookstores.
Now other bookstores, the chains, are putting in huge children's segments.
Oh, the new Barnes & Noble and Framie, I was just signing here two weeks ago.
Number one, it's huge.
It's a huge store.
And right next door to Bordas.
Oh, is it?
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, they're playing hardball, these guys.
They really are, yes.
Right next to each other.
Absolutely, yeah.
And I heard from the woman at Barnes & Noble that Bordas may respond by building yet another larger store.
Instead of leaving and being scared away, they might just expand, you know.
Yeah, I know.
I was just in Bordas last night, as a matter of fact.
The one in Framingham.
Yeah, the one in Framingham.
Yeah, it is.
But again, a large children's section.
Did you see that section over there where they come in, a little area where the kids can sit?
Oh, absolutely, yeah.
I signed on a Saturday, and I said, well, a crowd, maybe I'll get a crowd.
They're all families of kids.
I was happy to see that.
I know, there are a lot of kids.
But they were in with the kids to look at children's books.
But let's say that that figure of 40% is right, maybe it's 35%, maybe it's
Well, you know, that's not the point.
The point is, for those who say that books and children are anachronisms, that's rather dramatic evidence to the contrary.
I was going to say, there's rather dramatic evidence to the contrary all the time.
Yeah, yeah.
And, you know, I don't know.
My father pioneered in the television industry, and he built some of those early Capehart-Farnsworth sets, and we had TV, you know, right after, literally, out of the war.
there were all those claims then that television would do all these miraculous things, you know, for the education of the math.
Well, yeah, that's what I was going to tell you, history.
But, you know, they're not unlike the claims that are being made for some of the electronic media now, you know.
And I think that sometimes we have to look at things as...
Maybe they will develop some way, but also maybe they won't.
But one thing we know, we know books work.
I mean, that's one thing.
We do know books work in terms of educating children.
I mean, that's quite clear.
Whether the other media will work as well, I don't think we're yet aware, as we were not aware of television when I was growing up.
It was a tactile experience, which I described in my book.
Absolutely.
When I went off to find all these people, and then, you know, starting with William Scheide, who
let me handle this Gutenberg Bible.
Yes, yeah.
I almost fainted.
I know.
Yeah, well, it's the whole thing.
You know, as you know, it's the binding and the end papers and the type and the choices and the paper.
I feel it, really.
It's a beautiful book can really make me pause.
Yes, yeah.
It's a book as physical object.
And it never fails.
And I handle thousands of books a year.
If the book is beautiful, I will drop everything
to pay attention to it.
Well, and didn't you, when you were an author and you finally saw the book Bound, isn't it just, isn't it, yeah, like a thrill that you cannot communicate?
I did, too.
I saw this book and I cried, you know.
In fact, I was on the phone with one of my, one of the papers that takes my piece out in Grand Rapids.
I don't know how to get it.
And my wife came down with the Federal Express.
It's my visitor's page.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
I don't need it right now.
And I said to the wife, I said, Sue, I've got to call you back.
I mean, I said, my book is here, you know.
That was really, and it's an exquisite dust jacket.
It's got the dura engraving of the book full with the gold border around it.
Yeah, yeah.
And it was a moment.
Isn't it just an incredible moment to see it?
As one who's been writing all my life, all my adult life, you know, I did a piece on Amy Tan just this week.
I was looking at the first one this morning in Worcester.
You know, what it looks like on one of these screens.
And there have been studies, you know, at MIT.
The response to the same words on a manuscript page is different from the response that you see in type.
In type, exactly.
In a printed book or in a newspaper.
And I can't describe how you do that.
I know certain things that I write.
If you read it in the manuscript, my wife always reads my stuff.
I say, trust me.
It'll be fine.
And it will look different, and it will feel different.
And I think what you're describing when you pick up the book, I know there will always be books.
Exactly.
And... I've read typescripts of famous, famous authors of things I've seen, and it's just different.
It's totally different.
Well, even think of... When you see it in the printed book.
For newspapers, I created a magazine for 11 years.
Loved creating a magazine.
There's something quite wonderful about it.
It doesn't feel the same thing as a book.
I mean, it's wonderful to see your words in print.
It's not the same as seeing a bound book.
I have to say the book is a whole experience unto itself.
Yeah, I believe that it is.
And I think that that's some of...
as you said, it's not going to look quite the way, and it's not even in a CD-ROM, you know, and it's not, the other thing that is sometimes important in this, if you can, if something's interactive, you know, then you can create it and you can create it yourself, and there are certain wonderful things about creation, but there's something wonderful about an author's point of view which you cannot alter, you know, I mean, which you must enter into, you know, I mean, that it's not something that you're creating,
It's a world that has been totally created for you that you are walking into.
Exactly.
And I have said often that reading is the only artistic exercise that I can think of where the artist really communes one-on-one.
Yes.
That's what I think.
In every instance, it's between the writer
And I suppose you could say that for a painting, but I don't think so.
Because it's in a room and people are looking at it.
And it's really one.
It's unique.
The painting is unique.
And people are looking at it and they're responding together.
But a book is... That's right.
It's that single communication of one person to one other person reading it.
It's in the same reason why I believe that a parent reading with a child is so special.
Because...
again, it's one-on-one or a family group together, or it's something that's shared in a very intimate way, you know, reading a novel to a couple of children, that sitting children down in front of the television does not... I don't ever remember a single television show I watch with my family.
I can honestly tell.
You know, I never... But I remember things my grandmother read to me that my mother read to... I mean, I have vivid memories, and there's certain poetry...
as I say, that will always have my grandmother and my mother's voice on it because they were the ones who first read it to me.
And so there's even that way in which when it's not just a single person reading a book, there's even that way in which the reader becomes the author of the book when they share it with children or when you share it with an audience.
It's like hearing a poet read their work, you know, if you've sat and listened to an audience.
Now, you mentioned earlier that
the world of adult publishing is an alien planet.
And that's great.
But when you are, as an editor of children's books... No, what I mean by alien planet, I mean, I can't describe it.
Yeah, I mean, yeah.
I know exactly what you mean.
When I come to transcribe people, I'll know exactly what you said.
Okay.
But my point is, you have to have a lot of the kid in you.
Yeah.
I think all of us who remain...
In children's publishing, we're very much in touch with the feelings of our own childhood.
We are working with creators who are very much in touch with their own childhood or their children's childhood or their grandchildren's childhood.
And that you never... I always think we have the best of both worlds because we're adults, you know.
But we can still remain true to that child self, too.
That we don't have to put it away.
It's still part of us.
We're still aware of it.
Are you mindful of trends or are there other things that you just feel are universal and you're looking for the... I mean, you mentioned earlier that in a lot of the picture books, there are trends and there are science things or multicultural things or whatever, and you have to do them.
And I really like multicultural things in children's books.
I think that's really the place for them.
Yes, yeah.
If ever there's a place that argues for a book that
That can speak to different children and different realities.
And it allows them to be very proud of whatever cultural that's the place to do it.
And I save these books and collect them, as long as they're not, you know, a little too cynical and a little too exploitive of things.
Right, exactly.
And we see them too, I guess.
Yeah.
Anyway, but do you try to be on the cutting edge of trends, or are you still looking
I think, well, the thing is, I think, you know, you publish and you work in a world, so you're very aware of what's going on.
I mean, certainly I've just come from reviewing.
I saw everything that everyone did, so I'm extraordinarily aware at this time.
But I really believe that what works is better.
Publishing good books.
It's hunting for those things that work.
Publishing good books well.
Well, exactly.
That's really the goal, is to try to publish good books very well.
As someone who thinks a lot about books, sometimes I'm concerned about vacuums, books that aren't there, the kinds of publishing that isn't happening now for children.
found a manuscript in some of those areas, I would be more receptive to it, if you know what I mean, or if I have a concern.
I mean, when I was editor of the Horn book, one of the editorials I wrote several years before multiculturalism came about was, where are the books that represent all of our children?
Because that was a great concern to me.
I mean, I was seeing a quite homogenous world in children's books, and that's not good.
You know, you've got to have a wide range of
childhood experience represented in what's publishing.
So I'm always sort of aware of what's not there, but in the end... And he's, pardon me for interrupting, but any specific things that you feel are being ignored?
I think that right now, as I survey the field, it seems to me that writing for the middle grades, whether it's information books, biography, fiction, that third, fourth, fifth grade reader is just
They're fabulous picture books.
We have some wonderful writing on the young adult level.
But we've sort of forgotten that some of the crucial times in reading come from third, fourth, fifth grade.
And whatever group of books I look at, I don't see enough in that range.
So right now, that's one of my great concerns.
What age group is that?
No, it's probably that, what, 9 to 12, 8 to 11, right around in there.
It seems to be an area, because so much energy started to go to picture books and illustrated non-fiction, very young non-fiction, we don't see a lot of, you know, new writers in that area or new books or new creations.
So I'm concerned about, you know, again, because I'm concerned about providing books for all children, what children are gaining for.
But the marketplace dictates a great deal of that, doesn't it?
Picture books are...
picture books are doing.
And the amazing thing about children's books, I don't think I haven't been alert to this.
I mean, picture books, if they're good, they're around forever.
This book comes back year after year.
Absolutely, yeah.
And not only comes back, but on the bestseller list.
Yeah, exactly.
The first printing for an adult nonfiction book might be 10,000.
A book like this can be 200,000.
Oh, I know.
And that's what you hope.
What you hope is you're publishing something good enough
that it stays year after year after year.
And that certainly is, I would say, I don't know, what is it?
It's 10 years now.
Yes.
Older Express is 10 years.
It has to be close to classic status, would you say?
Oh, yeah.
When I was at Hornbrook, we were just pulling together a list of classics.
We were publishing it for parents.
It's in the works.
But yes, we included a few titles from maybe the last 10 years, you know, the 10 or 15 years that we would put on that list of Older Express.
the subsequent part of the book.
There must be a dozen things that she left that you felt... Oh, that couldn't be included in the book?
Oh, yeah, that's what was always the hardest.
I could have really done a book of 1,600 pages, and I would have been, you know, if you love books, you know, there were just so many authors I couldn't include, and illustrators.
Do you realize now what you've probably done for collectors now?
Collectors are going to try and get every book on their list.
Oh, really?
I'd never thought of that.
Yeah, yeah.
My good friend Bob Corby is in there.
Oh, of course he's there.
Listen, he is.
Isn't he wonderful?
He's the best, you know.
I mean, he really, you know, defined the young adult genre of books for us.
Can you give me a quote on that?
Sure.
Because I might do an interview for my newspapers who have not seen who write about it.
Okay, yeah, absolutely.
And I think it may even be in the young adult essay in here, but there had been a couple of books
both published for adults, Lord of the Flies and Catcher in the Rye, which by and large totally worked with an adolescent, obviously adolescent reader, but nothing had really been created totally for that adolescent reader, I think, until The Chocolate War was the great breakthrough in publishing in the early 1970s.
At that point, other writers, just because of the sheer artistry of what Bob Cormier did in that book, other writers became attracted to it as a genre, and the whole young adult field developed.
And what's exciting about Bob, of course, is that he did that fabulous book in early 1970s and continues to write these absolutely chilling novels that work
so well with young adults, and he does it... And he writes it down, and he talks about themes.
Oh, talks about, and that are important, and, you know, and yet what he can do, he's a fine, fine storyteller.
I mean, it always works with plot and character, and that he's continued to do just book after book after book.
He's, as you know, the nicest human being of the world, among other things, you know, but he's just such a talented creator.
I hadn't seen him for a while, and
We were both out at the ABA, and I just ran into him at the airport, and we talked, you know, a little bit of a fact, and I talked for the longest time.
His wife, Connie.
Oh, I know, aren't they?
I know.
But you think of his books, they're really almost totally unknown to adults.
And I say, you know, read one of these books.
Don't think that you're going to be, you know, amusing yourself with something
Yeah.
Irrelevant exercise.
I often, sometimes when adults ask me, why do you do this insane thing, be it children's books, Anita, you're such a sophisticated adult, I always give them, I am the cheese, Bob Cormier's, I am the cheese, and I give them Natalie Babbitt's Talk Everlasting to read.
And inevitably, they come back to me and say, this is really spectacular.
I mean, these are really superb books.
books, are there any more of them, you know?
So I always think that those are two books that are quite wonderful to win over, you know?
And I would give them now Lois Lowry's The Giver, too, because I think that's another book that adults can respond to.
I remember when I read it after the first death, I was so upset.
I mean, to the point where I wrote him, I said, why did you have to kill this child?
And this is sufficient.
Did you have to do this?
Well, you know, and that book's phenomenal because
he really gets you to understand the mind of a terrorist.
You know, and I mean, that is not a mind that I can easily understand, and yet somehow or another he makes that... But he really evoked a visceral response, which is what a writer is supposed to do.
Always, yeah.
So he succeeded brilliantly, and I remember being upset and saying, oh no, you didn't kill us.
He didn't kill, but I mean, he allowed this child to, you know... To die.
To die.
And that's supposed to break every taboo in writing, and that's supposed to...
kill children and animals, you know.
I know, I know.
Thank goodness he doesn't write to what he's supposed to write.
He just writes, you know, and that's what, I mean, he writes to tell the story that has to be told.
I read a comment from you about the golden age of, you felt, you feel that we are in a golden age of children's books, or is it illustrated children's books?
Well, illustration, yeah, I think there's no doubt that what we're seeing in terms of illustration in art is quite extraordinary.
And I would certainly call it, you know, it's one of our great Renaissance periods in children's books in that way.
There's a tremendous amount of vitality right now in the children's book field.
There are a lot of new writers, new creators, people trying different things.
Lane Smith and John Cheska, you know, being examples of quite innovative and new creators.
But I've always thought it's always been a wonderful time to be in children's books, because it's children's books.
I mean, there just isn't a bad time for me.
I've seen it when there have been a lot of books published and when there have been few books published.
But what is remarkable to me is that every year there are just these gems that emerge.
any parent or any teacher would love to share with children.
And whether there are 2,000 books published or 5,000 books published, you know, there are always that cream that rises that is just so fine.
What's amazing about children's books is that, unlike adult trade, a book will be issued, the publication date will be whatever, and you'll get that one.
I notice the books I request from the publishers, they come
When they arrive, UPS, and my wife and I do the children's books together, I have to say.
In fact, I let her do the first screening, and she would do the initial evaluations, and then working together, I'll write it.
But what a day then.
They never fail to surprise and to move.
You say, well, how many themes can they do over and over again?
But that's the beauty, isn't it?
I know.
And I suppose in sitting where you sit, that's what you're looking for all the time.
That's exactly what you're looking for.
You know, all the time.
The magic.
Yeah, all that time you're looking for that magic.
You know, you're looking for that manuscript that sends a shiver down your back.
You know, that art that you look at and think, this is so beautiful.
You know, what a... That's the exciting thing about being on this side of the process, again.
I might just talk briefly about that, going from...
the reviewing side of the process, which you did for eleven years, and now to the creative side, I guess.
Is there a climate?
I mean, is this a return for you, or a progression?
Well, I was at Houghton before.
I was here before, yeah.
And I always, it's funny, I've always divided my career between reviewing and publishing.
That great quote in Alan Say's grandfather's journey, the moment I'm in one country, I long for the other.
It's wonderful when you're a reviewer because you see everything, but you're just one step away from actually being able to decide that this book will be published and how it will be published and what you can do with it.
And that's such a wonderful part of the process.
So for me, it was coming back to that process, which I'd missed a lot.
And just for the record, I think Houghton, how many children's books did I do a year?
They do something.
I think there's the Clarion List, Walter Lorraine Books, and Houghton.
So that's about maybe 100, 125, around in there.
Yeah, it's a good-sized list, yes, at this point.
So this is quite nice.
I mean, this is one of the premier books.
It's one of the great lists.
It's one of the great back lists.
You literally start with Curious Georgian about the department was formed somewhere in the 1930s that not definitely formed and then eventually was by the end of the 30s.
And it is consistently produced, just one
one classic children's book after another, one fine book after another.
But, of course, that establishes a standard.
That's right, exactly.
You can't go below that.
No.
The bar is very high.
And that's who would want anything else.
Who would want it any other way?
And that's why I mentioned these Shaw's supermarket things.
Boy, you know, stick to produce.
Let the professionals do it.
Don't mess.
Literacy is a fundamental concern, isn't it?
Yes.
I also read that you had expected once to be a teacher.
Yes, I trained to be a teacher, and I thought I was going to do that.
And I got my master's degree at the University of Wisconsin in Madison and came to Boston right after that.
You know what?
He takes my stuff.
Oh, yeah.
That's the collection there.
And I've been on the stage in the Wisconsin State Journal.
Yes.
I'll be mindful of placing, of putting that information in the piece.
Yeah, yeah.
It was 1970, there were too many teachers at that point, and I knew someone through a friend at Little Brown, and he said, well, why don't you think of coming into publishing?
It never occurred to me, but there was an opening in the children's book department, and I literally thought, well, if I can't teach children, why not work on books for them?
Oh, yeah.
Oh, no, and I've never, and needless to say, the minute I found it, I mean, the minute I found it, it was, I should have done it, you know, I should have known all my life.
Well, I read also that you described yourself as a book appreciator, and I like that.
Yeah, yeah.
A praise singer, I guess you call it.
I like that even more.
But I guess this was in context with the question, have you ever thought yourself about doing a children's book?
No, not a children's book, because my mind...
doesn't work that way.
It's a different kind of talent, and I'm very respectful of that talent.
You know, it's a unique ability, and
I could write about, as I did here, a children's book for adults.
You know, I can certainly do that.
But you're describing it.
Because I'm describing it, and I'm doing it again.
It's a work of criticism.
Yeah, it's a work of criticism.
I can do that, that part.
But it is, it's very different.
The creative process of people who can create is very different.
My editor at Holt, Alan Peacock, who's the main writer, is terrific.
Yes, yes, I certainly have.
And he said something recently, he said, well,
the novel I probably will never write.
I said, oh, you know more about fiction than anybody.
I mean, look at your office.
It's more for what surprises and this and that.
Yeah.
No, this is a different thing.
It is.
It's a different thing altogether.
And it's exactly what you're saying.
Yeah, it is.
It's a different ability.
And I'm just so
you know, in awe of people who have that ability.
I mean, that drawing there, that's one that Alan, say, created for me for the cover of the Horn book.
Isn't it, I mean, again, you know, just that ability to create that kind of image.
Yeah, or to write the text that goes with it, you know.
Yes, absolutely.
Yeah, yeah.
So, no, I don't have it, but I certainly am grateful that there are people who do.
There's also a line you used
And I have to say, I was signing at Neva a couple weeks ago, and the booksellers love my book, because it's a celebration of books.
And so one woman came up and she said to the bookseller, I'm a bibliotherapist.
So that's the first time I've heard the phrase.
And I said, really?
I said, that's kind of nice.
I said, what do you do?
And she says, well, people come in to my store, and they tell me
what they're interested in, and I prescribe your book.
Give me a couple seconds with this inscription.
Well, that's a different way.
Bingo!
That's a little different vision of bibliotherapy than I talk about.
But tell me about what the word means to you.
Well, bibliotherapy is, I believe, a kind of reductive view of children's books, which is you take
a problem that a child might have, such as divorce, and you write around that problem, and therefore you believe that book will help that child.
In reality, what we find from children's reading is that books may help them tremendously with emotional things.
but not necessarily a book written to the specific problem that they have.
Again, it's a reductive view of children's reading.
If I describe this, if I give them a therapeutic solution to their problem, they'll read that, and then they won't be feeling the same way.
And that children, from best I can tell, that may not be the book
that helps them, although there may be a book that's very, very different.
You know, a good story, a good survival story.
There are all kinds of things that they might respond to.
Is this a word that you... No, no, it's a common word in the profession.
Really?
Yeah, it's a common word.
And did you basically just define it for me?
I will use it in this piece.
Yes, basically.
I'd like to give it some... Okay, some basic definition.
Yeah, I would suppose that I basically defined it.
It's that sense that a book can be written to a topic, and it will...
it will deal with the topic and therefore help the child with that particular problem.
And some of those books are better than others, you know, but by and large, they are not the ones that stand the test of time.
Beyond that wonderful function, there's still that timeless element of awe and wonder and magic.
And that is almost ineffable, isn't it?
You can't really
You know it when you see it.
You can't define it.
And, yes, and that's, of course, part of what makes a classic.
It is that wonder and that magic and that awe and just that sense of recognition that comes when you're in a story that, you know, speaks to you at some very, very deep level.
My older daughter was just the other night was asking me if she'd seen something in the news.
She said, Dad, what's the difference between pornography and erotica?
Mm-hmm.
That's a pretty good question.
I said, I think one of the court decisions was, you know when you see it.
One is really, really bad.
I think we've got a lot of stuff.
Okay, all right.
That should be, if that's fine.
Yeah, okay.